source/payload-interfaces/index.rst, before:

Payload Interfaces
==================

   The bootloader provides platform information to payload through
   standard ACPI table, SMBIOS table, Device tree and a series of data
   structures called the Hand Off Blocks (HOBs). If the information is
   already defined in ACPI specification, SMBIOS specification or device
   tree, the payload could parse them to get the required information.
   For the platform information that is not defined in the standard
   tables, the bootloader should build a HOB list to pass it to the
   payload.

   All of them should be optional

   (Add device tree to reference:

   https://buildmedia.readthedocs.org/media/pdf/devicetree-specification/latest/devicetree-specification.pdf)

   Open: Do we need a set of configuration data to config payload?

   We do not believe so.

   Open: Do we need pass data from payload to bootloader to impact
   bootloader behavior in next boot?

   Keep it open now.

   Open: will payload be run in S3 path?

   Suggest skipping payload.

ACPI tables
-----------

   ACPI table is required to boot modern operation system, especially to
   boot windows operating system. ACPI table should be provided by
   bootloader since most of the tables are platform specific. The
   payload might update some of the ACPI tables if required.

   The payload could parse the ACPI table to get some basic platform
   information. For example, the Fixed ACPI Description Table (FADT)
   defines various fixed hardware ACPI information to an ACPI compatible
   OS, such as the base address for the following hardware registers
   blocks: PM1a_CNT_BLK, PM_TMR_BLK, PM1a_EVT_BLK, GPE0_BLK,
   PM1b_EVT_BLK, PM1b_CNT_BLK, PM2_CNT_BLK, and GPE1_BLK. The payload
   could use them and other values (e.g. RESET_REG, RESET_VALUE) to make
   the payload platform independent.

   The other example is to get PCIE base address from ACPI memory mapped
   configuration space access table definition, defined in the PCI
   Firmware Specification.
   `http://www.pcisig.com <http://www.pcisig.com/>`__.

   And another example is on the debug device info. The bootloader might
   report debug device following up ACPI Debug Port Table 2 (DBG2). If a
   fully 16550-compatible serial device is specified in the ACPI DBG2,
   bootloader should provide a Serial Debug Information HOB in the HOB
   list so that the payload could use same debug device with same
   setting. If the ACPI DBG2 table could not be found, the payload
   should use serial device provided by the Serial Debug Information HOB
   as the default debug device.

   (ACPI DBG2 document.
   http://download.microsoft.com/download/9/4/5/945703CA-EF1F-496F-ADCF-3332CE5594FD/microsoft-debug-port-table-2-CP.docx)

HOB List
--------

   The bootloader should build a HOB list and pass the HOB list header
   to payload when passing control to payload. The HOB format is
   described in the *Platform Initialization (PI) Specification - Volume
   3: Shared Architectural Elements*. The payload could decide on how to
   consume the information passed from the bootloader.

   The sections below describe the HOBs from the bootloader to provide
   the system architecturally information. Additional bootloader
   specific HOB may be defined in the bootloader specific documents.

Resource Descriptor HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   The bootloader should report the system resources through the HOB
   following **EFI_HOB_RESOURCE_DESCRIPTOR** format defined in *Platform
   Initialization Specification Volume 3: Shared Architectural
   elements*.

   For example, any physical memory found in bootloader should be
   reported using resource type **EFI_RESOURCE_SYSTEM_MEMORY**, and the
   reserved memory used by bootloader should be reported using resource
   type **EFI_RESOURCE_MEMORY_RESERVED**.

   I/O and memory mapped I/O resource should also be reported using
   resource type **EFI_RESOURCE_IO** and
   **EFI_RESOURCE_MEMORY_MAPPED_IO**.

   **Open**: should report payload in memory using the Boot Firmware
   Volume (BFV) HOB?

ACPI Table HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   The bootloader should pass ACPI table through the GUID HOB to the
   payload. So that the payload could get the platform information from
   the ACPI table.

   Build the different HOBs for different table using standard defined
   GUID.

   | **HOB GUID**
   | **#define EFI_ACPI_TABLE_GUID \\**
   | **{0x8868e871, 0xe4f1, 0x11d3, {0xbc, 0x22, 0x0, 0x80, 0xc7, 0x3c,
     0x88, 0x81}}**

   **Note: This GUID reuses the same GUID defined in UEFI spec chapter
   4.6 EFI Configuration Table**

   **Hob Interface Structure**

   #pragma **pack**\ (1)

   | *///*
   | */// Bootloader acpi table hob*
   | *///*
   | typedef struct {
   | EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE Header;

   | UINT64 TableAddress;
   | } ACPI_TABLE_HOB;

   #pragma pack()

   **Member Description**

   Header

   Header.Name set to EFI_ACPI_TABLE_GUID. See section 6.5
   EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE.

   **TableAddress**

   Point to the ACPI RSDP table. The ACPI table need follow ACPI
   specification verson 2.0 or above.

SMBIOS Table HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   The bootloader might pass SMBIOS table through the GUID HOB to the
   payload. So that the payload could get the platform information from
   the table.

   | **HOB GUID**
   | **#define SMBIOS_TABLE_GUID \\**
   | **{0xeb9d2d31, 0x2d88, 0x11d3, {0x9a, 0x16, 0x0, 0x90, 0x27, 0x3f,
     0xc1, 0x4d}}**

   | **#define SMBIOS3_TABLE_GUID \\**
   | **{0xf2fd1544, 0x9794, 0x4a2c, {0x99, 0x2e, 0xe5, 0xbb, 0xcf, 0x20,
     0xe3, 0x94}}**

   **Note: These GUIDs reuse the same GUIDs defined in UEFI spec chapter
   4.6 EFI Configuration Table**

   **Hob Interface Structure**

   #pragma **pack**\ (1)

   | *///*
   | */// Bootloader SMBIOS table hob*
   | *///*
   | typedef struct {
   | EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE Header;

   | UINT64 TableAddress;
   | } SMBIOS_TABLE_HOB;

   #pragma pack()

   **Member Description**

   Header

   Header.Name set to SMBIOS_TABLE_GUID if SMBIOS table from
   TableAddress follows the format defined by SMBIOS_TABLE_ENTRY_POINT,
   or set to SMBIOS3_TABLE_GUID if SMBIOS table from TableAddress
   follows the format defied by SMBIOS_TABLE_3_0_ENTRY_POINT. See
   section 6.5 EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE.

   **AcpiTableAddress**

   Point to the SMBIOS table entry point.

DEVICE TREE HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   The bootloader might pass Device Tree through the GUID HOB to the
   payload. So that the payload could get the platform information from
   the table.

   | **HOB GUID**
   | **#define DEVICE_TREE_GUID \\**
   | **{0x6784b889, 0xb13c, 0x4c3b, {0xae, 0x4b, 0xf, 0xa, 0x2e, 0x32,
     0xe, 0xa3}}**

   **Hob Interface Structure**

   #pragma **pack**\ (1)

   | *///*
   | */// Bootloader Device Tree hob*
   | *///*
   | typedef struct {
   | EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE Header;

   | UINT64 DeviceTreeAddress;
   | } DEVICE_TREE_HOB;

   #pragma pack()

   **Member Description**

   Header

   Header.Name set to DEVICE_TREE_GUID. See section 6.5
   EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE.

   DeviceTreeAddress

   Point to the Device Tree entry point.

Graphics information HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   If bootloader initializes the graphics device, the bootloader might
   report graphics mode and framebuffer information through
   **EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_INFO_HOB**, and graphics hardware information
   through **EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_DEVICE_INFO_HOB**.

   **EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_INFO_HOB** and
   **EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_DEVICE_INFO_HOB** provide the basic information
   for the graphics display. These HOBs are described in the *PI
   Specification.*

   Please refer Appendix 6.6 EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_INFO_HOB and 6.7
   **EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_DEVICE_INFO_HOB** for the details.

Serial Information HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   If the debug device type and subtype are specified in DBG2, the
   bootloader should pass SERIAL_PORT_INFO hob to payload. This hob
   provides 16550 compatible serial debug port information from
   bootloader to payload.

   **Opens: Should we let bootloader provide debug callback** **for
   debug?**

   | **HOB GUID**
   | **#define SERIAL_INFO_GUID \\**
   | **{0xaa7e190d, 0xbe21, 0x4409, {0x8e, 0x67, 0xa2, 0xcd, 0xf, 0x61,
     0xe1, 0x70}}**

   **Hob Interface Structure**

   **#pragma pack(1)**

   typedef struct {

   UINT16 Reversion;

   BOOLEAN UseMmio;

   UINT8 RegisterWidth;

   UINT32 BaudRate;

   UINT64 RegisterBase;

   } SERIAL_PORT_INFO;

   **#pragma pack()**

   **Member Description**

   **UseMmio**

   Indicates the 16550 serial port registers are in MMIO space, or in
   I/O space.

   Reversion

   Use 0 for this spec

   **RegisterWidth**

   Indicates the access width for 16550 serial port registers, e.g.:

   8 - serial port registers are accessed in 8-bit width.

   32 - serial port registers are accessed in 32-bit width.

   **RegisterBase**

   Base address of 16550 serial port registers in MMIO or I/O space.

   **BaudRate**

   Baud rate for the 16550 compatible serial port.

   It could be 921600, 460800, 230400, 115200, 57600, 38400, 19200,
   9600, 7200, 4800, 3600, 2400, 2000, 1800, 1200, 600, 300, 150, 134,
   110, 75, 50

   Set to 0 to use the default baud rate 115200.

CPU INFO HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~

   The bootloader should build a CPU information HOB to the payload.

   | **HOB Type**
   | EFI_HOB_TYPE_CPU

   **Hob Interface Structure**

   #pragma **pack**\ (1)

   | *///*
   | */// CPU info Hob*
   | *///*
   | typedef struct {
   | UINT8 Revision;

   UINT8 Reserved;

   UINT8 SizeOfMemorySpace;

   | UINT8 SizeOfIoSpace;
   | } PAYLOAD_CPU_INFO;
   | #pragma pack()

   **Member Description**

   **Revision**

   Use 0 for this structure.

   **SizeOfMemorySpace**

   The maximum physical memory addressability of the processor.

   **SizeOfIoSpace**

   The maximum physical I/O addressability of the processor.

Optional HOBs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   Some more HOBs could be built by bootloaders for advanced features.

   e.g.:

   Support FVs (also other format) from bootloader to payload

   Add debug log as HOB to payload

   **Opens**: Does the bootloader need report IO info to payload?

   Better let the bootloader to report it,

   **Opens**: does the HOB List need a checksum?

   It looks not too much value. Keep it open if we really need it.

   **Opens**: For some information it is already in ACPI table, should
   bootloader build HOB for same info?

   Payload could have a check to ACPI table to get basic info they need.

Commit message:

Update ACPI table requirement to bootloader
Clarify the ACPI table requirement per issue #12.

Signed-off-by: Guo Dong <guo.dong@intel.com>

source/payload-interfaces/index.rst, after:

Payload Interfaces
==================

   The bootloader provides platform information to payload through
   standard ACPI table, SMBIOS table, Device tree and a series of data
   structures called the Hand Off Blocks (HOBs). If the information is
   already defined in ACPI specification, SMBIOS specification or device
   tree, the payload could parse them to get the required information.
   For the platform information that is not defined in the standard
   tables, the bootloader should build a HOB list to pass it to the
   payload.

   All of them should be optional

   (Add device tree to reference:

   https://buildmedia.readthedocs.org/media/pdf/devicetree-specification/latest/devicetree-specification.pdf)

   Open: Do we need a set of configuration data to config payload?

   We do not believe so.

   Open: Do we need pass data from payload to bootloader to impact
   bootloader behavior in next boot?

   Keep it open now.

   Open: will payload be run in S3 path?

   Suggest skipping payload.

ACPI tables
-----------

   ACPI table is required to boot modern operation system, especially to boot windows operating system.
   The bootloader should provide a ACPI RSDP HOB. In the ACPI table least RSDT, FADT and MCFG should be available to the payload.
   Payload could remove/add/modify the ACPI table passed from the bootloader if required.

   The payload could parse the ACPI table to get some basic platform
   information. For example, the Fixed ACPI Description Table (FADT)
   defines various fixed hardware ACPI information to an ACPI compatible
   OS, such as the base address for the following hardware registers
   blocks: PM1a_CNT_BLK, PM_TMR_BLK, PM1a_EVT_BLK, GPE0_BLK,
   PM1b_EVT_BLK, PM1b_CNT_BLK, PM2_CNT_BLK, and GPE1_BLK. The payload
   could use them and other values (e.g. RESET_REG, RESET_VALUE) to make
   the payload platform independent.

   The other example is to get PCIE base address from ACPI memory mapped
   configuration space access table definition, defined in the PCI
   Firmware Specification.
   `http://www.pcisig.com <http://www.pcisig.com/>`.

   And another example is on the debug device info. The bootloader might
   report debug device following up ACPI Debug Port Table 2 (DBG2). If a
   fully 16550-compatible serial device is specified in the ACPI DBG2,
   bootloader should provide a Serial Debug Information HOB in the HOB
   list so that the payload could use same debug device with same
   setting. If the ACPI DBG2 table could not be found, the payload
   should use serial device provided by the Serial Debug Information HOB
   as the default debug device.

   (ACPI DBG2 document.
   http://download.microsoft.com/download/9/4/5/945703CA-EF1F-496F-ADCF-3332CE5594FD/microsoft-debug-port-table-2-CP.docx)

HOB List
--------

   The bootloader should build a HOB list and pass the HOB list header
   to payload when passing control to payload. The HOB format is
   described in the *Platform Initialization (PI) Specification - Volume
   3: Shared Architectural Elements*. The payload could decide on how to
   consume the information passed from the bootloader.

   The sections below describe the HOBs from the bootloader to provide
   the system architecturally information. Additional bootloader
   specific HOB may be defined in the bootloader specific documents.

Resource Descriptor HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   The bootloader should report the system resources through the HOB
   following **EFI_HOB_RESOURCE_DESCRIPTOR** format defined in *Platform
   Initialization Specification Volume 3: Shared Architectural
   elements*.

   For example, any physical memory found in bootloader should be
   reported using resource type **EFI_RESOURCE_SYSTEM_MEMORY**, and the
   reserved memory used by bootloader should be reported using resource
   type **EFI_RESOURCE_MEMORY_RESERVED**.

   I/O and memory mapped I/O resource should also be reported using
   resource type **EFI_RESOURCE_IO** and
   **EFI_RESOURCE_MEMORY_MAPPED_IO**.

   **Open**: should report payload in memory using the Boot Firmware
   Volume (BFV) HOB?

ACPI Table HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   The bootloader should pass ACPI table through the GUID HOB to the
   payload. So that the payload could get the platform information from
   the ACPI table.

   Build the different HOBs for different table using standard defined
   GUID.

   | **HOB GUID**
   | **#define EFI_ACPI_TABLE_GUID \\**
   | **{0x8868e871, 0xe4f1, 0x11d3, {0xbc, 0x22, 0x0, 0x80, 0xc7, 0x3c,
     0x88, 0x81}}**

   **Note: This GUID reuses the same GUID defined in UEFI spec chapter
   4.6 EFI Configuration Table**

   **Hob Interface Structure**

   #pragma **pack**\ (1)

   | *///*
   | */// Bootloader acpi table hob*
   | *///*
   | typedef struct {
   | EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE Header;

   | UINT64 TableAddress;
   | } ACPI_TABLE_HOB;

   #pragma pack()

   **Member Description**

   Header

   Header.Name set to EFI_ACPI_TABLE_GUID. See section 6.5
   EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE.

   **TableAddress**

   Point to the ACPI RSDP table. The ACPI table need follow ACPI
   specification verson 2.0 or above.

SMBIOS Table HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   The bootloader might pass SMBIOS table through the GUID HOB to the
   payload. So that the payload could get the platform information from
   the table.

   | **HOB GUID**
   | **#define SMBIOS_TABLE_GUID \\**
   | **{0xeb9d2d31, 0x2d88, 0x11d3, {0x9a, 0x16, 0x0, 0x90, 0x27, 0x3f,
     0xc1, 0x4d}}**

   | **#define SMBIOS3_TABLE_GUID \\**
   | **{0xf2fd1544, 0x9794, 0x4a2c, {0x99, 0x2e, 0xe5, 0xbb, 0xcf, 0x20,
     0xe3, 0x94}}**

   **Note: These GUIDs reuse the same GUIDs defined in UEFI spec chapter
   4.6 EFI Configuration Table**

   **Hob Interface Structure**

   #pragma **pack**\ (1)

   | *///*
   | */// Bootloader SMBIOS table hob*
   | *///*
   | typedef struct {
   | EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE Header;

   | UINT64 TableAddress;
   | } SMBIOS_TABLE_HOB;

   #pragma pack()

   **Member Description**

   Header

   Header.Name set to SMBIOS_TABLE_GUID if SMBIOS table from
   TableAddress follows the format defined by SMBIOS_TABLE_ENTRY_POINT,
   or set to SMBIOS3_TABLE_GUID if SMBIOS table from TableAddress
   follows the format defied by SMBIOS_TABLE_3_0_ENTRY_POINT. See
   section 6.5 EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE.

   **AcpiTableAddress**

   Point to the SMBIOS table entry point.

DEVICE TREE HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   The bootloader might pass Device Tree through the GUID HOB to the
   payload. So that the payload could get the platform information from
   the table.

   | **HOB GUID**
   | **#define DEVICE_TREE_GUID \\**
   | **{0x6784b889, 0xb13c, 0x4c3b, {0xae, 0x4b, 0xf, 0xa, 0x2e, 0x32,
     0xe, 0xa3}}**

   **Hob Interface Structure**

   #pragma **pack**\ (1)

   | *///*
   | */// Bootloader Device Tree hob*
   | *///*
   | typedef struct {
   | EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE Header;

   | UINT64 DeviceTreeAddress;
   | } DEVICE_TREE_HOB;

   #pragma pack()

   **Member Description**

   Header

   Header.Name set to DEVICE_TREE_GUID. See section 6.5
   EFI_HOB_GUID_TYPE.

   DeviceTreeAddress

   Point to the Device Tree entry point.

Graphics information HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   If bootloader initializes the graphics device, the bootloader might
   report graphics mode and framebuffer information through
   **EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_INFO_HOB**, and graphics hardware information
   through **EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_DEVICE_INFO_HOB**.

   **EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_INFO_HOB** and
   **EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_DEVICE_INFO_HOB** provide the basic information
   for the graphics display. These HOBs are described in the *PI
   Specification.*

   Please refer Appendix 6.6 EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_INFO_HOB and 6.7
   **EFI_PEI_GRAPHICS_DEVICE_INFO_HOB** for the details.

Serial Information HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   If the debug device type and subtype are specified in DBG2, the
   bootloader should pass SERIAL_PORT_INFO hob to payload. This hob
   provides 16550 compatible serial debug port information from
   bootloader to payload.

   **Opens: Should we let bootloader provide debug callback** **for
   debug?**

   | **HOB GUID**
   | **#define SERIAL_INFO_GUID \\**
   | **{0xaa7e190d, 0xbe21, 0x4409, {0x8e, 0x67, 0xa2, 0xcd, 0xf, 0x61,
     0xe1, 0x70}}**

   **Hob Interface Structure**

   **#pragma pack(1)**

   typedef struct {

   UINT16 Reversion;

   BOOLEAN UseMmio;

   UINT8 RegisterWidth;

   UINT32 BaudRate;

   UINT64 RegisterBase;

   } SERIAL_PORT_INFO;

   **#pragma pack()**

   **Member Description**

   **UseMmio**

   Indicates the 16550 serial port registers are in MMIO space, or in
   I/O space.

   Reversion

   Use 0 for this spec

   **RegisterWidth**

   Indicates the access width for 16550 serial port registers, e.g.:

   8 - serial port registers are accessed in 8-bit width.

   32 - serial port registers are accessed in 32-bit width.

   **RegisterBase**

   Base address of 16550 serial port registers in MMIO or I/O space.

   **BaudRate**

   Baud rate for the 16550 compatible serial port.

   It could be 921600, 460800, 230400, 115200, 57600, 38400, 19200,
   9600, 7200, 4800, 3600, 2400, 2000, 1800, 1200, 600, 300, 150, 134,
   110, 75, 50

   Set to 0 to use the default baud rate 115200.

CPU INFO HOB
~~~~~~~~~~~~

   The bootloader should build a CPU information HOB to the payload.

   | **HOB Type**
   | EFI_HOB_TYPE_CPU

   **Hob Interface Structure**

   #pragma **pack**\ (1)

   | *///*
   | */// CPU info Hob*
   | *///*
   | typedef struct {
   | UINT8 Revision;

   UINT8 Reserved;

   UINT8 SizeOfMemorySpace;

   | UINT8 SizeOfIoSpace;
   | } PAYLOAD_CPU_INFO;
   | #pragma pack()

   **Member Description**

   **Revision**

   Use 0 for this structure.

   **SizeOfMemorySpace**

   The maximum physical memory addressability of the processor.

   **SizeOfIoSpace**

   The maximum physical I/O addressability of the processor.

Optional HOBs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   Some more HOBs could be built by bootloaders for advanced features.

   e.g.:

   Support FVs (also other format) from bootloader to payload

   Add debug log as HOB to payload

   **Opens**: Does the bootloader need report IO info to payload?

   Better let the bootloader to report it,

   **Opens**: does the HOB List need a checksum?

   It looks not too much value. Keep it open if we really need it.

   **Opens**: For some information it is already in ACPI table, should
   bootloader build HOB for same info?

   Payload could have a check to ACPI table to get basic info they need.
